War	Fighting between nations to resolve issues between them.
Peace	An absence of conflict, which leads to happiness and harmony.
Justice	Bringing about what is right and fair, according to the law or making up for a wrong that has been committed.
Forgiveness	Showing grace and mercy and pardoning someone for what they have done wrong.
Reconciliation	A sacrament in the Catholic Church; also, when individuals or groups restore friendly relations after conflict or disagreement.
Protest	An expression of disapproval, often in a public group.
Violence	Using actions that threaten or harm others.
Terrorism	The unlawful use of violence, usually against innocent civilians, to achieve a political goal.
Greed	Selfish desire for something.
Self-defence	Acting to prevent harm to yourself or others.
Retaliation	Deliberately harming someone as a response to them harming you.
Nuclear weapons	Weapons that work by a nuclear reaction; they devastate huge areas and kill large numbers of people
Weapons of Mass Destruction 	Weapons that can kill large numbers of people and/or cause great damage.
Chemical weapons	Weapons that use chemical to poison, burn or paralyse humans and destroy the natural environment.
Biological weapons	Weapons that have living organisms or infective material that can lead to disease or death.
Just War	A war which meets internationally accepted criteria for fairness; follows traditional Christian rules for a just war, and is now accepted by all other religions. 
Jihad	The personal struggle of each Muslim against evil as they try to follow the way of Allah.
Lesser Jihad	The outward struggle to defend one’s faith, family and country from threat.
Holy War	Fighting for a religious cause or God, probably controlled by a religious leader.
Pacifism	The belief of people who refuse to take part in war and any other form of violence.
Peacemaker	A person who works to establish peace in the world or in a certain part of it.
Peacemaking	The action of trying to establish peace
Muslim	One who has submitted to the will of God and has accepted Islam.
Islam	The name of the religion followed by Muslims; to surrender to the will of God; peace.
Allah	The Arabic name for God.
Tawhid	The Oneness and unity of God.
Monotheistic	A religion that believes there is only one God.
Supremacy	Supreme power or authority; a quality of God.
Qur’an	The holy book revealed to the Prophet Muhammad PBUH by the angel Jibril; God’s final revelation to humankind.
Sunnah	The teachings and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad PBUH.
Sunni	Muslims who believe in the successorship to Muhammad of Abu-Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali.
Shi’a	Muslims who believe in the Imamate, the successorship of Ali.
Immanent	The idea that Allah is present in & involved with life on earth and in the universe; a quality of Allah. 
Transcendent	The idea that Allah is beyond and outside life on earth and the universe; a quality of Allah.
Omnipotent	Almighty, having unlimited power; a quality of Allah. 
Beneficent	Benevolent, all-loving, all-good; a quality of Allah.
Merciful	The quality of Allah that shows compassion or forgiveness to humans, even though he has the power to punish them.
Fairness	The idea that Allah treats people fairly and impartially without favour or discrimination.
Justice (Adalat in Shi’a Islam)	The idea that Allah is just and fair and judges human actions, rewarding the good and punishing the bad.
Angels	Spiritual beings believed to act as Messengers of God.
Day of Judgement	A time when the world will end and every soul will be judged by God, and either rewarded or punished.
Jibril	The Arabic name for Gabriel, the archangel who brought God’s message to the prophets, particularly to the Prophet Muhammad PBUH.
Mika’il	The Arabic name for Michael, the archangel of mercy who rewards good deeds and provides nourishment to people.
Predestination	The idea that God knows or determines everything that will happen in the universe.
Akhirah	Everlasting life after death.
Heaven	The state of eternal happiness in the presence of God; also called paradise.
Hell	The state of total separation from God.
Immortality	Endless life or existence after death.
Soul	The spiritual rather than physical part of humans.
Resurrection	Rising from the dead or returning to life (applied to souls after death).
Prophet	A person who proclaims the message of God.
Risalah	The belief that prophets are an important channel of communication between God and humans.
Prophethood	When God makes someone a prophet to communicate his message to people.
Iblis (Satan)	A spiritual being created from fire, who was thrown out of paradise for refusing to bow to Adam.
Kaaba	The black, cube-shaped building in the centre of the Grand Mosque in Makkah; the holiest place in Islam.
Id-ul-Adha	A Muslim festival that celebrates the prophet Ibrahim’s willingness to sacrifice his son for God.
Hajj	The annual pilgrimage to Makkah that every Muslim should try to make at least once in their life.
Caliph	A person considered to be a political and religious successor to the prophet Muhammad, and the leader of the Sunni Muslim community.
Imam	1. A person who leads communal prayer; 2. (Imam) in Shi’a Islam, the title given to Ali and his successors.
Imamate	The divine appointment of the Imams.
The Torah	The five books revealed by God to Moses.
Psalms	A holy book revealed by God to David.
Gospel	A holy book revealed by God to Jesus.
Scrolls of Abraham	A holy book revealed by God to Abraham.
Design Argument	The argument that God designed the universe, because everything is so intricately made in its detail that it could not have happened by chance.
Theist	A person who believes in God.
Atheist	A person who believes that there is no God.
Agnostic 	Someone who thinks there is not enough evidence for belief in God.
First Cause Argument	Also called the cosmological argument; the argument that there has to be an uncaused cause that made everything else happen, otherwise there would be nothing now.
Eternal	Without beginning or end.
Creation	The act by which God brought the universe into being.
Miracle	A seemingly impossible event, usually good, that cannot be explained by natural or scientific laws, and is thought to be the action of God.
Proof	Evidence that supports the truth of something,
Faith	A commitment to something that goes beyond proof and knowledge, especially used about God and religion.
Evil 	The opposite of good, a force or personification of a negative power that is seen in many traditions as destructive and against God.
Suffering	When people have to face and live with unpleasant events or conditions.
Ultimate reality	The supreme, final, fundamental power in all reality. 
The divine	God, gods or ultimate reality.
Revelation	God showing Himself to believers; this is the only any anybody can really know anything about God.
Special Revelation	God making Himself know through direct personal experience or an unusual specific event.
Vision 	Seeing something, especially in a dream or trance, that shows something about the nature of God or the afterlife. 
Enlightenment	The gaining of true knowledge about God or self, usually through meditation and self-discipline; in Buddhist traditions gaining freedom from the cycle of rebirth.
General revelation	God making himself known through ordinary, common human experiences
Nature	The physical world including plants, animals and landscapers; the environment or natural world.
Scriptures	The sacred writings of religion; for Christians these are the Old and New Testaments.
Omnipotent	Almighty, having unlimited power; a quality of God.
Omniscient	Knowing everything; a quality of God.
Benevolent	All-loving, all-good; a quality of God.
Immanent	The idea that God is present in and involved with life on earth and in the universe; a quality of God.
Transcendent	The idea that God is beyond and outside life on earth and the universe; a quality of God.
Personal	The idea that God is an individual or person with whom people are able to have a relationship or feel close to.
Impersonal	The idea that God has no ‘human’ characteristics is unknowable and mysterious, more like an idea or force.
Reality	The quality or state of being actual or true.
Illusion	An erroneous perception of reality. 
Miracle	A seemingly impossible event, usually good, that cannot be explained by natural or scientific laws, and is thought to be the action of God.
Catholic	A branch of Christianity based in Rome and led by the Pope.
Orthodox	A branch of Christianity mainly, but not entirely, practised in Eastern Europe.
Protestant	A branch of Christianity, originally Protestants were called by that name because they protested against some of the practices of the Catholic Church; there are many Protestant denominations, but they agree on the central belief that the Bible is the only authority for Christians. 
Denomination	A distinct group within the Christian faith, with its own organisation and traditions.
God	The Supreme Being.
Monotheistic 	A religion that believes there is only one God.
Holy	Separate and set apart for a special purpose by God.
Omnipotent 	Almighty, having unlimited power; a quality of God.
Benevolent	All-loving, all-good; a quality of God.
Justice	Bringing about what is right and fair, according to the law, or making up for a wrong that has been committed. 
Trinity	The belief that there are three persons in the One God; the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are separate, but are also one being.
Holy Spirit 	The third person of the Trinity whom Christians believe is the inspiring presence of God in the world.
Son of God	A title used for Jesus, the second person of the Trinity; denotes the special relationship between Jesus and God the Father. 
Creation	The act by which God brought the universe into being.
The Word	Term used at the beginning of John’s gospel to refer to the Son of God.
Incarnation 	Becoming flesh, taking a human form.
Resurrection	1.Rising from the dead; 2. Jesus rising from the dead on Easter day. An event recorded in all four gospels and the central belief of Christianity.
Blasphemy	A religious offence which includes claiming to be God.
Crucifixion 	1.Roman method of execution by which criminals were fixed to a cross; 2.the execution and death of Jesus on Good Friday.
Ascension	The event, 40 days after the resurrection, when Jesus returned to God, the Father, in Heaven.
Heaven	A state of eternal happiness in the presence of God; the place of eternal peace ruled over by God. 
Afterlife	What Christians believe follows life on earth.
Day of Judgement	A time when the world will end and every soul will be judged by God and rewarded or punished.
Hell	The place of eternal suffering or the state of being without God.
Purgatory 	The intermediate state where souls are cleansed in order to enter heaven.
Satan 	Name for the Devil – the power and source of evil.
Sin	1.Any action or thought that separates humans from God; 2. Behaviour which is against God’s laws and wishes or against principles of morality. 
Original Sin 	An Augustine Christian Doctrine that says that everyone is born with a built-in urge to do bad things and disobey God; an important doctrine within the Catholic Church.
Salvation	Saving the soul, deliverance from sin and admission to heaven brought about by Jesus.
Grace	A quality of god which God shows to humans by providing love and support which they do not need to earn. 
Forgiveness	Showing grace and mercy and pardoning someone for what they have done wrong.
Atonement	Restoring the relationship between people and God through the life, death and resurrection of Jesus.
Mass	Ceremony, also called Eucharist, in which the sacrificial death & resurrection of Jesus is celebrated using bread and wine. 
Universe	All of time and space and its contents; includes planets, stars, galaxies, the contents of intergalactic space, the smallest subatomic particles, and all matter and energy
Fundamentalist Christians	Christians who believe that the statements in the Bible are literally true and believe there are certain basic beliefs that are essential to the Christian faith
Liberals	Christians who believe that the Bible’s authors were guided by God, but that not everything they wrote is a literal account of what actually happened
Big Bang	A massive explosion of space which set in motion the creation of the universe
Responsibility	A duty to care for, or having control over, something or someone
Stewardship (khalifah)	The idea that believers have a duty to look after the environment on behalf of God
Environment	The natural world; the surroundings in which someone lives
Dominion	Dominance or power over something; having charge of something or ruling over it
Awe	A feeling of devout respect; mixed feelings of fear and wonder
Wonder	Marvelling at the complexity and beauty of something
Pollution	Making something dirty and contaminated, especially the environment
Natural resources	Materials found in nature – such as oil and trees – that can be used by people
Abuse	Misuse; if the world and the environment
Sustainable development	Building and progress that try to reduce the impact on the natural world for future generations
Non-renewable resources	Things the earth provides that will eventually run out as there is a limited amount of them; examples include oil, coal, gas and other minerals
Deforestation	The cutting down of large amounts of forest, usually because of business needs
Renewable energy	Energy that comes from a  source that does not run out, such as the wind or sun
Recycling	Reusing old products to make new ones
Vegetarian	A person who does not eat meat or fish
Vegan 	A person who does not eat animals or food produced by animals (such as eggs); a vegan tries not to use any products that have caused harm to animals (such as leather)
Evolution	The process by which living organisms are thought to have developed and diversified from earlier forms of life during the history of the earth
Adaptation 	A process of change where an organism or species become better suited to its environment
Sanctity of life	The theory that all life is holy and given by God, therefore only God can take it away
Quality of life	The general well-being of a person, in relation to their health and happiness; also, the theory that the value of life depends upon how good or satisfying it is
Abortion	The removal of a foetus from the womb to end a pregnancy before the child is born, usually before the foetus is 24 weeks old
Ensoulment	The period from when Muslims believe the foetus is given a soul
Euthanasia	The painless killing of a patient suffering from an incurable disease or in an irreversible coma
Active euthanasia	Ending a life by deliberate action, such as by giving a patient a lethal injection
Passive euthanasia	Allowing a terminally ill or incurably ill person to die by withdrawing or withholding medical treatment
Eternity	A state that comes after death and never ends
Barzakh	An Arabic word meaning ‘obstacle’, ‘hindrance’, ‘separation’ or ‘barrier’
Heaven (Jannah)	A state of eternal happiness in the presence of God; the place of eternal peace ruled over by God; in Islam, also called paradise
Hell (Jahannam)	Eternal separation from God
Akhirah	Everlasting life after death
